hey guys I'm here today to talk to you
about the f-word you've all said it you
probably said it earlier today once or
twice for me maybe 20 times you've
probably set it to your friends your
friends have set it to you you'd be
surprised you've said it to your parents
your parents have said it to you and
this academic institution that we're
sitting in today has taught you to fear
it that word is in fact f you and fun
house a good one
I'm glad you guys are interactive so in
all honesty today I'm actually talking
to you about failure I was kind of given
in the pre-emptive failure is a terrible
thing everybody experiences it you will
experience it you'll speed your
experience academically career-wise so I
did what any good speaker who hasn't
really done much speaking would do and I
googled the word and I was going to do a
definition thing but everybody hates
those and so I did something else I
found there was 543 million data points
on the Internet's about failure that's a
lot of numbers and Google found that for
me in about 0.23 seconds that's a lot of
information very fast people obviously
care about failure so I pretended that I
was an alien from outer space and I was
coming to earth after a nuclear
apocalypse and the only thing left was
mother Google servers and I had to piece
together humanity and so I googled
failure and I found this it's an epic
fail I found this absolutely epic fail
this guy
it hurts and finally the most epic fail
of all and so I thought about what this
would mean to society in all honesty
that's not what my talk is about my talk
is about the fact that you will fail to
have a great career and this obviously
pulls on a fantastic TEDx UW talk of
past from Larry Smith and his talk was
deserves applause and his talk was you
will fail to have a great career unless
and in typical Larry fashion he left
unless as this low-hanging fruit it was
dangling in front of you and all you had
to do is reach out and grab it but you'd
really didn't know what it was and he
left it to you to make your own
conclusions I'm an engineer and I want
to make it easier for you to understand
what that unless is through my own
experiences so this is an optical
illusion you've all seen this optical
illusion before and you know what to
think about optical illusions so which
line is longer yell it out yell it out
the top one right okay so everybody's
saying that it is the same at least most
people think it's the same you're
trained okay you're trained to believe
that these lines are actually the same
and some of you are smart and should
keep your mouth shut I'm just kidding
but you're taught to believe that
they're actually the same length it's an
optical illusion I must be tricking you
therefore they're the same length
because I asked you which line is longer
so those of you that yelled out the same
you're actually wrong because I changed
it the top line is longer and so those
of you who are like the same the same
you probably feel a little foolish
because the guy next to you who thought
it but didn't say it it's not just
chilling he's like
that's right and if you're Malcolm you
love it because you got it right and you
somehow can calculate distances with
your brain but that feeling you have
inside of you right now is the feeling
of failure
you shouldn't have shed it out you
shouldn't have commented you shouldn't
have made that step you shouldn't have
followed your gut instinct and you'll
learn from that and what I want to teach
you is how to learn from that and so
story time in second year university I
started a company called lit energies
that is not a jar of my urine that is a
jar of biodiesel and my brother and I
wanted to produce biodiesel in Guelph
and sell it to companies all over the
world but mostly in Canada petrochemical
petrochemical companies had not
committed to producing biodiesel yet and
the greater transit 'ya the greater
transit authority of the Greater Toronto
Area GTA squared was going to be buying
biodiesel from small producers because
the government wanted all fleets to run
biodiesel so I traveled all over
southwestern Ontario with this little
jar of biodiesel trying to sell it to
these companies and we needed to sell
five million litres of biodiesel or to
raise five million dollars in cash to
build this refinery in Guelph it was a
lofty goal and there's one particular
incident this is the actual jar I kept
it in my glove box and it was a very
cold January day in the fear around
biodiesel specifically in Canada is that
it freezes at a temperature that's
higher than regular diesel fuel that's a
big issue in a cold climate my car was
old it didn't have a heating core I was
running it on one percent biodiesel to
make a point could barely start it in
the morning and I drove all the way to
Toronto with this jar of biodiesel in
the glove box I was 10 minutes early and
this was a meeting with the Greater
Transit Authority of the Greater Toronto
Area big meeting 42nd floor get out of
my car ten minutes early reach into the
glove box and I find a biodiesel
popsicle and you can imagine how
difficult this sale was going to be
because you need to have a product like
this that's tangible for people to buy
into it especially when there's fear so
I pulled this popsicle which is
not leaking on me and I get into the
elevator
42 floors two and a half minutes feels
like 18 years and I rub this jar between
my legs
this is the feeling of failure so I get
to the floor I check in my hands were
shaking I go to the bathroom I open the
top and I hold it underneath the hand
dryer two and a half minutes feels like
18 years and I start to see it slowly
flying I go sit in the waiting room I
find a vent on the floor I put my bag on
top of the vent and I'm believing that
this vent is going to melt the biodiesel
and I'm watching him watching it and the
lady behind the counter sees me look
into my bag and she's probably worried
that I've got like a bomb or a weapon in
there meaning gets delayed probably
because of that and I finally go in the
room and so everybody knew I had this
jar everybody wanted to see it and what
I would do is I'd pour it into a wine
glass people could touch it feel it I
wouldn't touch the stuff myself
some guys would drink it because they
believed in the capabilities of this
product have the meeting where's the bow
diesel we really want to see it because
we had produces ourselves in our garage
I have it but let's talk about the
environmental implications of the
product for a little while longer
whereas about as we want to see it I
have it but let's talk about being a
clean feet a green fleet for Canada
finally I could no longer wait and I
looked into the bag and I saw this
wonderfully clear golden liquid and it
had thawed and I reached in pulled it
out uprighted it and funk 80% ice and
that was the end of the meeting and that
feeling is a feeling of failure and I
remember instinctively thinking to
myself which is a comical thought that I
was literally selling ice to Eskimos and
it could have been more true we failed
to build let energies it was not a
success not only did we fail to build
lit energies but this was my second year
at university this is even before the
2/3 point to a wasn't even to be or not
to be I tried to build this business
and I failed that term in school as well
and so if you can imagine you start a
business you're crazy everybody thinks
you're insane and they all think that
you're going to fail and then you fail
your term in school and all the people
that thought you're going to fail now
rub it in because your friends are
moving on in academia and you've got a
year of your life with nothing to do
because your business failed
there's no way to sell this product
there's no money from investors and you
don't even have an academic career so I
did what everybody else does and I went
and worked at a big software company in
town and I learned how to write code and
I bettered myself for the process but
digging myself up from that wall dusting
myself off and moving forward was very
very difficult again my best friends in
the world were no longer going to be
going through an education with me and I
watched as they did I learned from that
and so I have another optical illusion
which line is longer the difference is
that everybody's a lot quieter because I
told you that you fail the first time
and that's the wrong lesson to learn
even though you're wrong I still hear
people mumbling it doesn't even matter
and I'm not going to tell you the answer
and if you find me after I can show you
but you should still be willing to shout
something out even if you're wrong
who cares what that guy next to you
thinks who cares what your friends think
who cares what your parents think you
will fail to have a great career unless
you fail to have a great career so an
oxymoron and it's ridiculous but it
makes sense right so again you will fail
to have a great career unless you fail
to have a great career don't listen to
your friends don't listen to your
parents don't listen to academic
institutions that make you fear the
concept of failure failing that academic
turn term and failing at building lit
energies was the best thing that ever
happened to me if you want to find out
more about that I'll stick around and
talk to you about it remember be
somebody or be somebody's fool thank you
you